# supplementary-material-thesis

Supplementary material for the PhD thesis "Estrutura e Ancestralidade Genética de Populações Afro-Derivadas Brasileiras" (Structure and Genetic Ancestry of Afro-Derived Brazilian Populations) defended at the Animal Biology Post Graduation Program - University of Brasília, Brazil. Data pertaining chapters 2 and 3 will be made available upon publishing.

Abstract
Latin America has an intricate history which is reflected in the genetic composition of its human populations. In spite of the growing literature on Latin American populations genetics, non-urban and non-indigenous communities, which comprise around 20% of Caribbean and South American populations, are underrepresented in public databases fit for ancestry and structure analysis. That deficiency is problematic for forensic genetics, as it relies on accurate descriptions of genetic variation and population structure, and for the understanding of the continent’s history and demographic events that gave rise to its population. All over the continent, communities were founded by runaway or otherwise freed African slaves and their descendants as a way of resisting the slave system or as a consequence of its collapse. Many of those communities exist to this day and to some extent, have remained genetically isolated from neighboring populations. Brazilian quilombos and Colombian palenques and comunidades negras are examples of such. Here, we aimed to contribute to the body of knowledge about quilombos with information on their ancestry and genetic structure, thus improving the representation of rural populations in databases of forensic and anthropological interest. Additionally, we aimed at contrasting our study populations to one another, to their presumptive parentals and to other populations and assess whether historical parallels are reflected in genetic ancestry. Two rural quilombos: Kalunga (Goiás) and Riacho de Sacutiaba e Sacutiaba (Bahia) were analysed for the AIM systems forInDel, PIMA and SNPforID 34plex, as well as the combined PIMA + 34plex. The Brazilian quilombo Mocambo (Sergipe) and the Colombian comunidad negra Mulaló were included when data was available. We assumed a tri-hibrid admixture model based on historical plausibility and selected parental populations for ancestry analysis from HGDP-CEPH following that main criterion and the amount of variation observed within and between groups. Further, we present a new AIM system (PIMA: Population Informative Multiplex for the Americas), that has proven efficient in differentiating the indigenous American ancestry component from that of other continental populations, namely African, European and East Asian. Our assessment of genetic ancestry and structure has confirmed that the main admixture components in the quilombos and the comunidad negra are African and European. Regardless of that similarity that likely stems from parallels in history and origin, our results also state that our study populations are not homogeneous. Beyond attesting the diversity among human populations from Latin America, our observations reiterate the need to describe non urban and non indigenous populations in order to build databases adequate for ancestry analysis.
Keywords: Genetic Ancestry, AIM, Quilombo, Afro-derived, BGA

